.. _upgrading-0-3-to-1-0:

Upgrading from 0.3 to 1.0
=========================

The 1.0 release is a ground-up redesign. This guide covers only the breaking
surface — the changes that require a code edit or a behavior review when moving
a 0.3 codebase to 1.0. Every section below carries an explicit ``.. _label:``
anchor; deprecation-warning URLs point at these anchors, so they stay valid even
if a heading is later reworded.

.. _license-mit:

License changed to MIT
----------------------

Edify 1.0 is released under the MIT License. Releases ``0.3.0`` and earlier were
Apache-2.0.

Two user-facing facts:

* MIT drops Apache-2.0's **explicit patent grant**. If your legal review
  specifically relied on that grant, pin ``edify<1.0``.
* Every git tag ``v0.3.0`` and earlier **remains Apache-2.0 permanently** — the
  relicense applies going forward only. Installs pinned to a ``0.3.x`` tag are
  unaffected.

.. _python-floor:

Python floor raised to 3.11
---------------------------

Edify 1.0 requires Python 3.11 or newer. The 0.3 line supported 3.8+. Upgrade
your interpreter before installing 1.0; ``pip install edify`` on 3.10 or older
resolves to the last 0.3 release.

.. _validators-callable:

Validators are callable ``Pattern`` instances
---------------------------------------------

In 0.3 the built-in validators under ``edify.library`` were plain functions. In
1.0 every validator is a callable :class:`edify.Pattern` instance:

.. code-block:: python

    import inspect
    from edify import Pattern
    from edify.library import email

    inspect.isfunction(email)        # False   (was True in 0.3)
    isinstance(email, Pattern)       # True    (was False in 0.3)
    email("user@example.com")        # True    (call form unchanged)
    email.match("user@example.com")  # <re.Match object>

The ``validator(value) -> bool`` call form is unchanged, so most call sites need
no edit. The new surface adds ``.match``, ``.search``, ``.to_regex_string``, and
every other :class:`Pattern` method on top.

.. _library-reorg:

Library reorganized into category submodules
--------------------------------------------

The library moved from a flat module into category folders (``identifier/``,
``address/``, ``contact/``, ``auth/``, ``financial/``, ``temporal/``, and more).
Every validator remains importable from the flat top-level namespace, and is now
*also* importable from its category submodule:

.. code-block:: python

    from edify.library import uuid                # flat top-level (unchanged)
    from edify.library.identifier import uuid     # category submodule (new)

If you imported validators from ``edify.library`` in 0.3, those imports keep
working.

.. _named-backref-return:

Named back-references no longer raise
-------------------------------------

In 0.3, ``.named_back_reference(name)`` raised when the named group had not been
declared earlier in the chain. In 1.0 it emits the back-reference and defers
validation to compile time, matching the behavior of the numeric
``.back_reference(index)``.

.. _to-regex-string-output:

``to_regex_string()`` output normalized
---------------------------------------

The emitted pattern string is now the minimal correct form. The most visible
change is character-class escaping: inside ``[...]`` only ``\``, ``]``,
first-position ``^``, and interior ``-`` are escaped; every other metacharacter
is a literal.

.. code-block:: text

    0.3:  any_of_chars('#?!@$%^&*-')  ->  [\#\?!@$%\^\&\*\-]
    1.0:  any_of_chars('#?!@$%^&*-')  ->  [#?!@$%^&*-]

The two forms match identically — only the string representation changed. Code
that compared ``to_regex_string()`` against a hard-coded expected string with the
old redundant backslashes must drop them.

.. _char-class-escape:

Character-class escaping is the minimal correct form
----------------------------------------------------

This is the rule behind the ``to_regex_string()`` change above, stated directly
for callers who construct char classes: ``any_of_chars`` and
``anything_but_chars`` escape only the characters that carry syntactic meaning
inside ``[...]``. Match behavior is identical to 0.3's over-escaped output.

.. _regex-wrapper-return:

Match methods return an edify ``Match`` wrapper
-----------------------------------------------

``.match``, ``.search``, and ``.fullmatch`` on :class:`Regex` (and ``.finditer``)
now return an edify :class:`edify.result.Match` rather than a bare
:class:`re.Match`. Named captures are reachable as attributes
(``m.username`` / ``m.captures.username``), and every :class:`re.Match` method
(``.group()``, ``.groupdict()``, ``.span()``, …) is forwarded, so existing call
sites keep working.

.. _closed-match-verbs:

Builder match-verb surface closed at five
-----------------------------------------

The builder exposes exactly ``test`` / ``match`` / ``search`` / ``findall`` /
``sub``. The less-common ``fullmatch`` / ``finditer`` / ``subn`` / ``split``
verbs moved off the builder — reach them through ``.to_regex()`` and call them on
the returned :class:`Regex`:

.. code-block:: python

    # 0.3
    builder.finditer(text)

    # 1.0
    builder.to_regex().finditer(text)

.. _silent-failure-raises:

Silent failures now raise typed errors
---------------------------------------

Constructs that failed silently or produced a cryptic stdlib error in 0.3 now
raise a specific :class:`edify.errors.EdifySyntaxError` subclass with an
annotated message. The most common case: a variable-width ``assert_behind`` under
the default ``re`` engine raises
:class:`edify.errors.backend.VariableWidthLookbehindNotSupportedError` instead of
surfacing ``re``'s "look-behind requires fixed-width pattern".

.. _engine-kwarg:

Optional ``regex`` engine via ``engine=`` kwarg
-----------------------------------------------

``to_regex(engine="regex")`` selects the third-party ``regex`` backend, which
unlocks variable-width lookbehind and per-call timeouts. It requires the extra:
``pip install edify[regex]``. The default ``engine="re"`` is unchanged.

.. _builder-equality:

Builder equality compares emitted patterns
------------------------------------------

Two builders compare equal when they emit the same pattern string and carry the
same flags, rather than by object identity. This makes builders usable as
dict keys and in set membership.

.. _moved-import-paths:

Moved internal import paths
---------------------------

Internal machinery that leaked into 0.3's import surface has been privatized or
relocated. If you imported from an undocumented internal path in 0.3, import the
symbol from its documented location instead — every public symbol is reachable
from ``edify`` or a documented submodule.
